Devx 935 (#27)
bcgov/mobile-developer-guide: docs/distribution_methods.md

Mobile apps are distributed through the public app stores or MDM InTune. Your distribution method is determined by who will use your app.

![Diagram of the various distribution methods. If the app is for the general public, it's distributed via the Apple App Store and Google Play Stores. If it's an app for Government employees, it's distributed via MDM inTunes. If it's an app for Employees and Contractors, it is distributed as an unlisted app via the Apple App Store.](assets/distribution.drawio.svg)

## Public apps
Public apps are released through the Province's accounts on the Apple App Store and Google Play Store. These apps are used by the general public.

You must list your app through the Province's accounts. The [Developer Experience team](contact.md) will help you get your app on these accounts.

> [Contact us](contact.md) if your app's intellectual property (IP) doesn't belong to the Province of BC. We will work with you to determine how to release your app.

Author: ```suggestion
[Contact us](contact.md) if your app's intellectual property (IP) doesn't belong to the Province of B.C. We will work with you to determine how to release your app.
```

> [Contact us](contact.md) if your app's intellectual property (IP) doesn't belong to the Province of BC. We will work with you to determine how to release your app.

Author: ```suggestion
[Contact us](contact.md) if your app's intellectual property (IP) doesn't belong to the Province of B.C. We will work with you to determine how to release your app.
```

Once setup is complete, you'll have access to [App Store Connect](https://appstoreconnect.apple.com) and [Google Play Console](https://play.google.com/console/about/) to manage your app.

## Internal apps
Employee apps are distributed through [MDM inTune by the OCIO Device Management Team](mailto:MDAS@gov.bc.ca). While historically, employee apps only supported iOS devices, they're now also supported by Android. If you're planning to create an internal Android app, [contact us](contact.md). 

[Contact us](contact.md) at the start of your project so we can discuss the process for distributing an internal app. It requires setup from both the Developer Experience and OCIO Device Management teams.

### Apple Custom App vs Enterprise App

|    | Apple Custom  App | Apple Enterprise App |
| -- | --------------- | ---------- |
| App goes through Apple's App Review | Yes | No |
| App usable with expired signing certificate |  Yes |  No | 
| App usable with expired provisioning profile |  Yes |  No | 
| Beta test with [TestFlight](https://developer.apple.com/testflight/) | Yes | No |
| Can be a SaaS solution | Yes | No |

> | Who owns the app's IP | Province of BC or Developer | Province of BC |

Author: ```suggestion
| Who owns the app's IP | Province of BC or Developer | Province of B.C. |
```

> | Who owns the app's IP | Province of BC or Developer | Province of BC |

Author: ```suggestion
| Who owns the app's IP | Province of B.C. or Developer | Province of BC |
```

> | Who owns the app's IP | Province of BC or Developer | Province of BC |

Author: ```suggestion
| Who owns the app's IP | Province of B.C. or Developer | Province of B.C. |
```

An Apple mobile app has both a [signing certificate and a provisioning profile](apple_app_signing.md). App distribution requires these assets. A provisioning profile and Custom App certificate are valid for 1 year. An Enterprise App certificate is valid for 3 years. 

!!! warning
    If the assets of an Enterprise App expire, then the app will not work. This means your users can't use your app. 
    
    The Product Owner must schedule yearly updates to these assets, so they don't expire.

Custom and Public apps do not have this limitation. Your app will work with expired assets. 

The intellectual property (IP) of a SaaS app belongs to the app's developer. The developer uses their provisioning profile and signing certificate. They are responsible for updating these assets.

### Apple Custom App 

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of BC or are a SaaS solution not available on the public app store. The IP of purpose-built apps belongs to the Province of BC. The IP of SaaS apps belong to the developer. 

Author: ```suggestion
Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of B.C. or are a SaaS solution not available on the public app store. The IP of purpose-built apps belongs to the Province of BC. The IP of SaaS apps belong to the developer. 
```

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of BC or are a SaaS solution not available on the public app store. The IP of purpose-built apps belongs to the Province of BC. The IP of SaaS apps belong to the developer. 

Author: ```suggestion
Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of BC or are a SaaS solution not available on the public app store. The IP of purpose-built apps belongs to the Province of B.C. The IP of SaaS apps belong to the developer. 
```

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of BC or are a SaaS solution not available on the public app store. The IP of purpose-built apps belongs to the Province of BC. The IP of SaaS apps belong to the developer. 

Author: ```suggestion
Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of B.C. or are a SaaS solution not available on the public app store. The IP of purpose-built apps belongs to the Province of B.C. The IP of SaaS apps belong to the developer. 
```

#### Developer responsibilities

The developer handles developing the app and uploading it to [App Store Connect](https://appstoreconnect.apple.com). Custom apps go through [Apple's app review](https://developer.apple.com/app-store/review/) process. The same app review guidelines for App Store Apps apply to Custom Apps. The developer will ensure the app meets the guidelines.

In the case of a SaaS app, the developer will make it available to our ABM Organization ID. The developer will get the ID from the Product Owner and set it in [App Store Connect](https://appstoreconnect.apple.com/). Refer to Apple's [Distributing Custom Apps](https://developer.apple.com/custom-apps/) documentation for instructions.

#### OCIO Device Management team responsibilities

The OCIO Device Management Team will distribute the app to employee devices. They will work with the Product Owner to schedule the release.

### Apple Enterprise App

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are specifically made for the Province and are not SaaS solutions. The Province of BC holds the IP of these apps. They are signed with the Province's signing certificate.

Author: ```suggestion
Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are specifically made for the Province and are not SaaS solutions. The Province of B.C. holds the IP of these apps. They are signed with the Province's signing certificate.
```

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are specifically made for the Province and are not SaaS solutions. The Province of BC holds the IP of these apps. They are signed with the Province's signing certificate.

Author: ```suggestion
Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are specifically made for the Province and are not SaaS solutions. The Province of B.C. holds the IP of these apps. They are signed with the Province's signing certificate.
```

[Contact us](contact.md) at the start of your project so we can discuss the process for distributing an internal app. It requires setup from both the Developer Experience and OCIO Device Management teams.

### Apple Custom App 

Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of BC or are a SaaS solution. 

Custom apps go through Apple's app review process. The same app review guidelines for App Store Apps apply to Custom Apps.

Custom Apps are licensed from [Apple Business Manager (ABM)](https://support.apple.com/en-ca/guide/apple-business-manager/welcome/web) and assigned to the OCIO Device Management team's Intune Tenancy. They will distribute the app through MDM-Intune. 

#### Product Owner responsibilities

The Product Owner will work with the relevant teams to decide whether to use the OCIO’s ABM or the Ministry’s own ABM.

> If the Ministry decides to use its own ABM, it would need to create and manage it. As part of the setup it would add the OCIO’s MDM-Intune Organization ID as a location.

Reviewer: do we have a recommended path here? It seems like folks prefer us to indicate the "paved road"

Author: I've updated to include a recommended path

The Product Owner will provide the ABM ID to the developer.

#### Developer responsibilities

The developer handles developing the app and uploading it to [App Store Connect](https://appstoreconnect.apple.com). They will make the Custom App available to the appropriate ABM. Refer to Apple's [Distributing Custom Apps](https://developer.apple.com/custom-apps/) documentation for  instructions.

#### OCIO Device Management team responsibilities

The OCIO Device Management Team will distribute the app to employee devices. They will work with the Product Owner to schedule the release.

### Apple Enterprise App

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are specifically made for the Province and are not SaaS solutions. This distribution method is for apps that can't go through Apple's app review process.

Reviewer: It sounds like we want to discourage new applications from using this, so perhaps let's add something here to that effect? (if I'm remembering our conversations correctly?)

#### Product Owner responsibilities

The Product Owner will work with the Developer Experience team to decide which GitHub organization will host the project's code.

They will get the binary from the developer and provide it to the OCIO Device Management team.

#### Developer resposibilities

The developer handles developing the app and providing the binary to the Product Owner. A repeatable CI/CD pipeline is expected as part of this process.

#### OCIO Device Management team resposibilities

The OCIO Device Management Team will distribute the app to employee devices. They will work with the Product Owner to schedule the release.

> ### Enterprise vs Custom App

Reviewer: let's put this above the other two - then folks can jump down to the one they're interested in if this helps them make the decision up from

Author: Moved the table to above.

|    | Enterprise  App | Custom App |
| -- | --------------- | ---------- |
| App goes through Apple's App Review | No | Yes |

> | App usable with expired certificate |  No |  Yes | 

Reviewer: it doesn't feel like some folks understood the implications of an expired certificate, so we might need to add context somehow that makes it clear the impact of this

Author: Added section about implications of expiring assets

> | App usable with expired provisioning profile |  No |  Yes | 

Reviewer: same here

| Can be a SaaS solution | No | Yes |

> | TestFlight | No | Yes |

Reviewer: Can be released via TestFlight

Author: Renamed to "Beta Test with TestFlight"

### Apple Unlisted App

Use this method when your app is an internal app used by employees and contractors. Refer to [Apple's documentation](https://developer.apple.com/support/unlisted-app-distribution/) on how to distribute unlisted apps. These apps require some extra setup in App Store Connect. The [Developer Experience team](contact.md) will assist in this setup.

Unlisted apps will go through Apple's app review process. Ensure your app meets [Apple's guidelines](https://developer.apple.com/app-store/review/).

## App review process
Both the Apple App Store and Google Play Store have an app review process. 

> When creating your app, it's important to consider how the app reviewer will interact with your app. For example, if your app requires a user to login, the app reviewer will need either an account or access to a demo account. 

Reviewer: or the team can submit a recording of the app?

Author: BC Services Card is a special case. I don't want to put recording of the app into the docs and have teams plan to use it and get rejected.

[Contact us](contact.md) at the start of your project so we can discuss the process for distributing an internal app. It requires setup from both the Developer Experience and OCIO Device Management teams.

### Apple Custom App 

> Use this distribution method for internal apps used only by employees. These apps are either made specifically for the Province of BC or are a SaaS solution. 

Reviewer 2: Province of **B.C.**
